Satan is the main peace wrecker.
The Scriptures tell us
that he is driven by “great anger.”
His anger is malicious and uncontrolled.
Would any sound-minded,
God-fearing person
allow himself
to reflect Satan’s vicious anger?
Of course not!
That is why all true servants of God
are determined
to “put away” uncontrolled anger.
But apart from uncontrolled anger,
is all anger bad?
The Bible does not condemn all anger.
It teaches us that anger is wrong
when it is uncontrolled or unjustified.
At Ephesians 4:26, God’s Word tells us:
“Be wrathful, but [it adds] do not sin.”
At times, anger
may simply be a strong feeling
that comes into us
because of being upset or annoyed
by something that we see as being wrong.
That in itself is not bad.
But what makes anger bad
is when it fills a person’s heart
and he or she just loses control of it.
When that happens,
it may cause a person
to act without a sound mind.
Those who continue to lash out in anger
will not gain salvation.
Galatians 5:20 lists “fits of anger”
among “the works of the flesh”
that will prevent a person
from inheriting God’s Kingdom.
There will be no place
for such ones in God’s new world.
A brief review of how uncontrolled anger
wrecks peace for ourselves and others
will highlight why this is so.
Uncontrolled anger
harms both the angry person
as well as those around him.
We read at Proverbs 29:22
that an angry person “stirs up strife,”
adding that he “commits many transgressions.”
One of these many sins is abusive speech.
We must work to show restraint
when speaking with workmates,
with strangers in the ministry,
with our brothers and sisters
in the congregation,
and with our family members.
Bad feelings must be controlled.
Abusive speech, ridicule, contempt,
and hateful anger are wrong.
Giving vent to such feelings
can destroy precious friendships
with other people and with Jehovah.
Don’t be like a volcano
that will not quiet down.
Just like an erupting volcano
will harm those living around it,
so too a person who expresses intense anger
will harm those living around him.
He also damages himself.
In what way?
Acting on anger often leads
to even more aggression,
so uncontrolled anger
can also affect our own peace.
It can cause us to do something
that we will later regret.
It can have a negative effect on our health.
Medical studies show that uncontrolled anger
can cause high blood pressure
and respiratory problems.
It can also affect the liver and pancreas,
and such anger can cause digestive problems.
When a person becomes angry,
he or she will not always think clearly.
After a fit of rage,
a person may become depressed.
No wonder we read at Proverbs 14:30
that “a calm heart gives life to the body.”
The disastrous consequences
of uncontrolled anger
are illustrated in God’s Word
by the actions of Simeon and Levi,
sons of the patriarch Jacob.
When they learned that their sister, Dinah,
was violated by a man named Shechem,
we read at Genesis 34:7
that “they were offended and very angry.”
Now, they had a valid reason to be angry,
but they took their anger too far.
It was uncontrolled.
Simeon and Levi
took vengeance on Shechem.
Using deception, they attacked and killed
every male in Shechem’s city.
Then, along with the other sons of Jacob,
they plundered it and took
the women and little children captive.
Dinah’s tragic experience
must have grieved Jacob greatly.
Yet, he condemned
his sons’ uncontrolled anger.
Simeon and Levi
tried to justify their actions,
but that was not the end of the matter,
because Jehovah was also displeased.
For this reason, Jacob later foretold
that the descendants of Simeon and Levi
were to be scattered
among the tribes of Israel.
Their uncontrolled anger brought disfavor
from God and from their father, Jacob.
We’re wise to pay attention
to such Scriptural accounts
and put away uncontrolled anger
and all of the harm that it brings.
In the following dramatization,
notice how a person
might be tempted to give in to anger.
Yes, Nana?
Don’t forget eggs, dear.
No, no, I didn’t forget.
Are you sure, love?
No, I won’t forget. OK.
Thank you so much.
OK. Love you.
Bye.
No!
Haley, finally, I’ve caught you.
Do you have a minute?
Hi, Emily.
Can we talk later?
I’m really struggling this morning.
You know, it’s just that you’ve been so busy,
and I’ve been waiting for the right moment;
I’d really just like to address it.
OK. What’s up?
It’s just that I’ve noticed
your posts lately on QuicPost.
What about them?
Well, do you really think they’re something
that a pioneer should be posting?
What? What are you talking about?
Some people might think you’re bragging.
Some people? What people?
It’s a business account.
I’ve got to show off my products.
I know. I get that.
It’s just—
I don’t know.
It could feel like you’re drawing
a little too much attention to yourself.
Who would think like that? You?
No, not just me; Celia felt the same.
You spoke to Celia about this?
I didn’t want to upset you.
Jake said that I needed to take . . .
Jake! So everyone thinks
my posts are inappropriate?
Not everyone, Haley.
That’s not what I am saying at all.
You are such . . .
Wow! I can’t believe you.
Who else have you spoken to?
You are just such a gossip!
I’m not gossiping. I was trying to . . .
You are!
I’m just trying to help you,
if you would just listen to me.
You’re so jealous!
If you’d just listen to me.
Oh yeah, listen to this.
And I expected more from you.
Haley, what are you talking about?
Gossiping about my posts!
Are you that lonely
that you’ve got nothing better to do?
Haley,
wait, please!
Were you left feeling a bit tense?
If so, you know
what uncontrolled anger can lead to.
Now that we’ve defined uncontrolled anger
and considered what it can lead to,
the next question is,
How can we put away uncontrolled anger?
First, we need to recognize
the danger of uncontrolled anger.
Proverbs 25:28 states
that “as a city broken through,
without a wall,
is the man who cannot control his temper.”
Strong city walls
were vital in ancient times.
Without them a city
would quickly fall to invaders;
likewise, so will those
who cannot control their temper.
By losing control, they
make themselves vulnerable
to the invasion of wrong thoughts
—thoughts that can cause them
to hurt themselves and others.
Uncontrolled anger can do just that.
Next, after recognizing the danger,
we must pause and then deal with the anger
before it causes us
to do something that we will regret.
When anger grows within us,
we’re wise to recall
what happened with Simeon and Levi.
We might also recall what happened
in the video dramatization
that we just viewed.
You see, in each case,
pausing before reacting out of anger
may have spared
much pain and heartache, true?
That is why we have this warning
at Proverbs 17:14:
“Before the quarrel breaks out,
take your leave.”
With that in mind,
each of us should ask himself:
‘Do I tend to jump to conclusions
‘when I don’t have all the facts?
‘If so, can I take my leave
and put away anger
before it starts to build up?’
The inspired advice
found at James 1:19 will help us to do so
—but only if we make
a sincere and determined effort
to apply what it says.
Let’s read that verse—James 1:19.
And here we find some simple steps
to help us put away uncontrolled anger.
It says: “Know this, my beloved brothers:
“Everyone must be quick to listen,
slow to speak, slow to anger.”
If we ask Jehovah to help us with this,
namely to “be quick to listen,
slow to speak, slow to anger,”
he will assist us to do so.
He will help us
to see the facts of the matter,
show understanding,
and then put away uncontrolled anger.
A word of caution, though:
To succeed in doing our part,
we must choose our associates wisely.
We could undermine all of our good work
and Jehovah’s help in controlling our anger
if we choose associates who are arrogant,
opinionated, or quick to become angry.
Regarding someone who is disposed to rage,
Proverbs 22:25 warns:
“Never learn his ways.”
Well, we’ve enjoyed
another outstanding series of talks
that should help us to keep awake,
maintain fine conduct,
and escape the judgment
that will soon come on this world.
As this symposium has emphasized,
we must do our utmost
to continue to put away peace wreckers
such as inappropriate boasting, envy,
dishonesty, harmful gossip,
and uncontrolled anger.
If we have a problem
with any of the peacemaking qualities
that we have discussed in this symposium,
seek Jehovah’s help
to change and then work at it.
Our sincere efforts to pursue peace
with our brothers and our sisters
will influence how earnestly
we are awaiting “Jehovah’s day”
and his promised new world.
Yes, our genuine efforts
will affect our hearts
and will be noticed by our heavenly Father.
Then, in his great mercy,
Jehovah will consider us
to be, as his Word says,
“spotless and unblemished and in peace”
—both with him
and with our fellow worshippers.